setup_guide.md, before:

# ICS0024 Setup and Installation guide for CI/CD

## Virtual server setup

We decided to use AWS's EC2 Computing service to instantiate our linux instances


### SSH keys

To get an EC2 instance running, first we need an SSH key pair We created the initial key pair through EC2.

1. Go to EC2 Dashboard
2. In "Resources" select "Key pairs"
3. Click the "Create key pair"
4. Name that was chosen was "kiloss@mainPc.pem"
5. File format was ".pem"
6. No tags added
7. Confirm by pressing "Create key pair"

### Launching a new EC2 instance

To launch a EC2 instance, which is basically a virtual server in the cloud, we need to take the following steps:

1. Go to EC2 Dashboard
2. In Launch instance press "Launch instance"
3. Select "Ubuntu Server 20.04 LTS (HVM)"
4. When choosing an instance type, we went with "t3.micro" (Because it's free :D)
5. Leave "Configure Instance Details" as is
6. In "Add Storage" set Size to 16 GiB
7. Skipped adding tags
8. In "Configure Security Group" added a rule with Type "All traffic" and Source "0.0.0.0/0, ::/0"
9. Review and Launch > Launch
10. In the list of instances you can specify a name for your new instance (In our case it was "ics0024_prod" for production)

### Connecting to instance via SSH
To get detailed information on how to connect to your running instance select your instance and press "Connect".

Then press the "SSH client" tab, and you will see a nice guide on how to make an initial connection with the key pair
that your instance is using.

Example of initial connection:
```shell script
ssh -i "kiloss@mainPc.pem" ubuntu@ec2-13-53-186-119.eu-north-1.compute.amazonaws.com
```

We are in!

##### !NB
We can use public IP address instead of a DNS name if we want.

Example in our case:
```shell script
ssh -i "kiloss@mainPc.pem" ubuntu@13.53.186.119
```

### Adding Public keys

If you want to access the instance from other machines, you will have to add their public keys to .ssh/authorized_keys
file.

```shell script
cd ~/.ssh

nano authorized_keys
```

After you have your public key added, you can now ssh with just:

```shell script
ssh ubuntu@ec2-13-53-186-119.eu-north-1.compute.amazonaws.com
```

Or if you prefer to use your IP:

```shell script
ssh ubuntu@13.53.186.119
```

### Add additional virtual memory

If you want to do stuff that require a lot of memory consumption, you can create a swap file, which basically allows
using disk space as ram, which can improve performance.

 Adding 2GB to swap
```shell script
sudo fallocate -l 2G /swapfile  
sudo chmod 600 /swapfile  
sudo mkswap /swapfile  
sudo swapon /swapfile  
sudo swapon -show  
echo '/swapfile none swap sw 0 0' | sudo tee -a /etc/fstab
```

Last line allows the configuration to persist after machine reboot

### Installing Java to execute our .jar files

```shell script
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
sudo apt-get install openjdk-11-jre openjdk-11-jdk
```

### Manually run .jar files

If you want to manually run your .jar file

```shell script
java -jar Volatilator-api.jar
```

Replace Volatilator-api.jar with whatever is your .jar file is

### Installing gitlab-runner
Get the required binary, in our case we need *amd64 binary:
```shell script
sudo curl -L --output /usr/local/bin/gitlab-runner https://gitlab-runner-downloads.s3.amazonaws.com/latest/binaries/gitlab-runner-linux-amd64
```

Give gitlab-runner execution permissions:
```shell script
sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/gitlab-runner
```

Create a gitlab user that will be executing the binary
```shell script
sudo useradd --comment 'GitLab Runner' --create-home gitlab-runner --shell /bin/bash
```

Install and run as service
```shell script
sudo gitlab-runner install --user=gitlab-runner --working-directory=/home/gitlab-runner

sudo gitlab-runner start
```

If you are using gitlab runner on AWS Ubuntu 20.04 then you might run into the following problem:

https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-runner/-/issues/26605

To fix this problem you need to alter '/home/gitlab-runner/.bash_logout', so it'd look the following way:

```shell script
# ~/.bash_logout: executed by bash(1) when login shell exits.

# when leaving the console clear the screen to increase privacy

#if [ "$SHLVL" = 1 ]; then
#    [ -x /usr/bin/clear_console ] && /usr/bin/clear_console -q
#fi

```

If you altered .bash_logout after the initial start of the runner then 
you will have to restart it with the following command:

```shell script
sudo service gitlab-runner restart

```

#### NB!
It seems that gitlab-runner might be preinstalled on the virtual server from the get go, so don't worry
too much if you get following messages when running previously listed commands.
```console
useradd: user 'gitlab-runner' already exists
```

Or

```console
FATAL: Failed to install gitlab-runner: Init already exists: /etc/systemd/system/gitlab-runner.service
```

### Register the runner
To register the runner for a specific repository

1. Go to the repository of choice
2. Settings > CI / CD
3. Expand the "Runners" tab
4. Under the "Set up a specific Runner manually" will be information for setup

Run gitlab-runner setup
```shell script
sudo gitlab-runner register
```
Provide information from the "Set up a specific Runner manually"

Also specify the tag for the runner, in our case the tag is "api"

when it asks you to Enter an executor, specify "shell"

### Configure CI in gitlab

Add .gitlab-ci.yml file to the root folder of your repository

Example of how the file contents should look like:
```yaml
stages:
  - build
  - test
  - deploy

before_script:
  - export GRADLE_USER_HOME=`pwd`/.gradle

build api:
  stage: build
  cache:
    paths:
      - .gradle/wrapper
      - .gradle/caches
  artifacts:
    paths:
      - build/libs
  tags:
    - api
  script:
    - ./gradlew assemble

test api:
  stage: test
  tags:
    - api
  script:
    - ./gradlew check

deploy api:
  stage: deploy
  only:
    refs:
      - main
  tags:
    - api
  script:
    # mkdir make folder api-deployment ~/ is under current user directory so for gitlab it would be /home/gitlab/api-deployment
    - mkdir -p ~/api-deployment
    # rm remove -rf is recursive files from api-deployment
    - rm -rf ~/api-deployment/*
    # cp - copy build/libs is where
    - cp -r build/libs/. ~/api-deployment
    # this requires sudo rights for gitlab user
    #- sudo service volatilator restart
```

After you are done, you need to push the changes

Commit message:

gave execution permissions to gradlew and updated setup_guide.md

setup_guide.md, after:

# ICS0024 Setup and Installation guide for CI/CD

## Virtual server setup

We decided to use AWS's EC2 Computing service to instantiate our linux instances


### SSH keys

To get an EC2 instance running, first we need an SSH key pair We created the initial key pair through EC2.

1. Go to EC2 Dashboard
2. In "Resources" select "Key pairs"
3. Click the "Create key pair"
4. Name that was chosen was "kiloss@mainPc.pem"
5. File format was ".pem"
6. No tags added
7. Confirm by pressing "Create key pair"

### Launching a new EC2 instance

To launch a EC2 instance, which is basically a virtual server in the cloud, we need to take the following steps:

1. Go to EC2 Dashboard
2. In Launch instance press "Launch instance"
3. Select "Ubuntu Server 20.04 LTS (HVM)"
4. When choosing an instance type, we went with "t3.micro" (Because it's free :D)
5. Leave "Configure Instance Details" as is
6. In "Add Storage" set Size to 16 GiB
7. Skipped adding tags
8. In "Configure Security Group" added a rule with Type "All traffic" and Source "0.0.0.0/0, ::/0"
9. Review and Launch > Launch
10. In the list of instances you can specify a name for your new instance (In our case it was "ics0024_prod" for production)

### Connecting to instance via SSH
To get detailed information on how to connect to your running instance select your instance and press "Connect".

Then press the "SSH client" tab, and you will see a nice guide on how to make an initial connection with the key pair
that your instance is using.

Example of initial connection:
```shell script
ssh -i "kiloss@mainPc.pem" ubuntu@ec2-13-53-186-119.eu-north-1.compute.amazonaws.com
```

We are in!

##### !NB
We can use public IP address instead of a DNS name if we want.

Example in our case:
```shell script
ssh -i "kiloss@mainPc.pem" ubuntu@13.53.186.119
```

### Adding Public keys

If you want to access the instance from other machines, you will have to add their public keys to .ssh/authorized_keys
file.

```shell script
cd ~/.ssh

nano authorized_keys
```

After you have your public key added, you can now ssh with just:

```shell script
ssh ubuntu@ec2-13-53-186-119.eu-north-1.compute.amazonaws.com
```

Or if you prefer to use your IP:

```shell script
ssh ubuntu@13.53.186.119
```

### Add additional virtual memory

If you want to do stuff that require a lot of memory consumption, you can create a swap file, which basically allows
using disk space as ram, which can improve performance.

 Adding 2GB to swap
```shell script
sudo fallocate -l 2G /swapfile  
sudo chmod 600 /swapfile  
sudo mkswap /swapfile  
sudo swapon /swapfile  
sudo swapon -show  
echo '/swapfile none swap sw 0 0' | sudo tee -a /etc/fstab
```

Last line allows the configuration to persist after machine reboot

### Installing Java to execute our .jar files

```shell script
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
sudo apt-get install openjdk-11-jre openjdk-11-jdk
```

### Manually run .jar files

If you want to manually run your .jar file

```shell script
java -jar Volatilator-api.jar
```

Replace Volatilator-api.jar with whatever is your .jar file is

### Installing gitlab-runner
Get the required binary, in our case we need *amd64 binary:
```shell script
sudo curl -L --output /usr/local/bin/gitlab-runner https://gitlab-runner-downloads.s3.amazonaws.com/latest/binaries/gitlab-runner-linux-amd64
```

Give gitlab-runner execution permissions:
```shell script
sudo chmod +x /usr/local/bin/gitlab-runner
```

Create a gitlab user that will be executing the binary
```shell script
sudo useradd --comment 'GitLab Runner' --create-home gitlab-runner --shell /bin/bash
```

Install and run as service
```shell script
sudo gitlab-runner install --user=gitlab-runner --working-directory=/home/gitlab-runner

sudo gitlab-runner start
```

If you are using gitlab runner on AWS Ubuntu 20.04 then you might run into the following problem:

https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab-runner/-/issues/26605

To fix this problem you need to alter '/home/gitlab-runner/.bash_logout', so it'd look the following way:

```shell script
# ~/.bash_logout: executed by bash(1) when login shell exits.

# when leaving the console clear the screen to increase privacy

#if [ "$SHLVL" = 1 ]; then
#    [ -x /usr/bin/clear_console ] && /usr/bin/clear_console -q
#fi

```

If you altered .bash_logout after the initial start of the runner then 
you will have to restart it with the following command:

```shell script
sudo service gitlab-runner restart

```

#### NB!
It seems that gitlab-runner might be preinstalled on the virtual server from the get go, so don't worry
too much if you get following messages when running previously listed commands.
```console
useradd: user 'gitlab-runner' already exists
```

Or

```console
FATAL: Failed to install gitlab-runner: Init already exists: /etc/systemd/system/gitlab-runner.service
```

### Register the runner
To register the runner for a specific repository

1. Go to the repository of choice
2. Settings > CI / CD
3. Expand the "Runners" tab
4. Under the "Set up a specific Runner manually" will be information for setup

Run gitlab-runner setup
```shell script
sudo gitlab-runner register
```
Provide information from the "Set up a specific Runner manually"

Also specify the tag for the runner, in our case the tag is "api"

when it asks you to Enter an executor, specify "shell"

### Configure CI in gitlab

Add .gitlab-ci.yml file to the root folder of your repository

Example of how the file contents should look like:
```yaml
stages:
  - build
  - test
  - deploy

before_script:
  - export GRADLE_USER_HOME=`pwd`/.gradle

build api:
  stage: build
  cache:
    paths:
      - .gradle/wrapper
      - .gradle/caches
  artifacts:
    paths:
      - build/libs
  tags:
    - api
  script:
    - ./gradlew assemble

test api:
  stage: test
  tags:
    - api
  script:
    - ./gradlew check

deploy api:
  stage: deploy
  only:
    refs:
      - main
  tags:
    - api
  script:
    # mkdir make folder api-deployment ~/ is under current user directory so for gitlab it would be /home/gitlab/api-deployment
    - mkdir -p ~/api-deployment
    # rm remove -rf is recursive files from api-deployment
    - rm -rf ~/api-deployment/*
    # cp - copy build/libs is where
    - cp -r build/libs/. ~/api-deployment
    # this requires sudo rights for gitlab user
    #- sudo service volatilator restart
```

You will also need to be sure the gradlew file has execution permission, this can be done the following way:
``` shell script
git update-index --chmod=+x gradlew
```

After you are done, you need to push the changes
